---
layout: post
title:  "Building the OpenJDK"
author: "Ovidiu Ionescu"
---

In 2006 Sun Microsystems open sourced Java and made it available under the GPLv2 license with the Classpath exception.
All of a sudden anybody could compile their own distribution, Java was finally free.

Today after so many years, not many people compile their own Java. Some even don't know this is possible.

Last time I went to FOSDEM, I found out about a new initiative: AdoptOpenJDK. They compile Java distributions from
the source, run the tests and make the binaries available for everyone. While this is indeed promoting the 
OpenJDK project, for most people the experience hasn't changed: you download a pre-made distribution and you
install it. Most likely you'll never notice any difference.

When Sun first opened the source compiling the OpenJDK was not that straightforward, the source was spread in 
different repositories and it required quite a bit of effort to get everything right. 
Most of the pages with instructions on how to build the OpenJDK yourself that Google finds, are from that era.

One evening I decided to give it a try. Here is what happened that evening.

## Attempt one: how not to do it
My first impression was that I should better use the scripts from the AdoptOpenJDK project and spare myself the
trouble. Cloned their source from GitHub and gave it a go. They require you to already have a version of Java
installed on your machine but I already had several and this didn't look like an issue.

Here comes the first disappointment: when I tried building jdku14 the scripts first downloaded Gradle and then 
complained about the existing Java version being to high. I changed the JAVA_HOME variable to point to an older
version of Java and this time it passed the Gradle and Groovy stage then it complained the Java version was too
low.

I tried fixing the scripts by instructing it to download a newer version of Gradle, Googled for solutions and even
looked at the OpenJDK list of issues on GitHub. The process was not becoming quite long and I wasn't sure any
more if I was still saving effort with this approach.

## Attempt two: sometimes the hard way turns out to be the easy way

Went to the source repository in OpenJDK's to have a look: [OpenJDK source](https://hg.openjdk.java.net/jdk/). 
In there, was waiting quite a nice surprise: for newer versions of Java 
the whole source was now in just one place, no need to clone lots of Mercurial forests.

I clicked on jdk and then browse and then noticed the doc subdirectory.

A readme file in the doc subdirectory had short instructions on how to build. Surely I thought, 
it couldn't have been that simple.

The steps were pretty straightforward:
- Install mercurial
- Clone the source
- Configure the build
- Make the images

I decided to give it a go. My computer is running the lastest version of Debian so the steps I followed
are specific to an apt Linux distribution.

Install Mercurial

```bash
$ sudo apt install mercurial
```

A few seconds later mercurial was installed. Cloning the source was just as simple:
```bash
hg clone http://hg.openjdk.java.net/jdk/jdk
```

This command will fetch the current development source, at the time of this article, jdk15. You will probably want to 
stick to the released version so that command would be:

```bash
hg clone http://hg.openjdk.java.net/jdk/jdk14
```

But again, if you are reading this, you are probably comfortable on the bleeding edge zone.

Cloning the Mercurial repository will take ages. On my system it took almost an hour and I have a reasonably good 
internet connection.

Get something to do in the meantime. It's really too long to stare at slowly moving progress bar on the screen.
After the download finished I decided to make a copy so that I would not have to wait as long if I want to repeat the process:

```bash
tar c  jdk | xz -9 > jdk.tar.xz
```

I was expecting this to not be instant as it goes for high compression but the result was shockingly large:

``` bash
ovidiu@ionescu:~/3party/OpenJDK$ ls -l jdk.tar.xz 
-rw-r--r-- 1 ovidiu ovidiu 1053971052 Apr 17 23:30 jdk.tar.xz
```

That's practically a gigabyte. Also the time it took to produce it almost rivalled the time it took to download the source in the first place.

Next step is, get inside the newly created directory and run the configure file. This is an old approach when programming on Linux: 
have a script that finds if all the necessary libraries are present and produce a scripts that allow you to build the program.

I thought my system had enough dev libraries installed but the configure script instructed me to install some more. It was really easy,
just used apt and in a couple of minutes the config script declared itseld satisfied.

Now for the final step, how long will this be?

`make images`

Well, the previous long steps made this one felt pretty snappy. Everything in life is relative.

After the wait was over, the moment of truth: do I have a working JDK?

```bash
ovidiu@ionescu:~/3party/OpenJDK/jdk$ build/linux-x86_64-server-release/jdk/bin/java -version
openjdk version "15-internal" 2020-09-15
OpenJDK Runtime Environment (build 15-internal+0-adhoc.ovidiu.jdk)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM (build 15-internal+0-adhoc.ovidiu.jdk, mixed mode)
```

Looks like it worked!

But building it is not the full story. I wanted to add my own modification to it.

One of the things missing in the standard distribution is a method to reverse a String. java.lang.String does not have a reverse method, you need to put the String into StringBuilder, reverse it and then convert it back to a String.
It seems to be a common interview question and while the solution above is trivial, I thought it would be much nicer to add it in.

A quick find command showed me where the source for java.lang.String

```bash
ovidiu@ionescu:~/3party/OpenJDK/jdk$ find . -name 'String.java'
./src/java.xml/share/classes/com/sun/org/apache/xpath/internal/operations/String.java
./src/java.base/share/classes/java/lang/String.java
./test/langtools/tools/javac/importOnDemand/p1/String.java

```

The second file found is the one I wanted. Went inside and added a new method:

```java
    /**
     * Allocates a new {@code String} that contains the caracters of this
     * String in reverse order.
     *
     * @return String
     *         The reversed String
     */
    public String reverse() {
        int n = this.length();
        char[] buf = new char[n];
        for(int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
            buf[i] = this.charAt(n - i - 1);
        }
        return new String(buf);
    }
```

Ran `make images` again and this time the build was really quick.

In order to start using the new JDK you need configure it to be the default one:

```bash
export JAVA_HOME=/home/ovidiu/3party/OpenJDK/jdk/build/linux-x86_64-server-release/images/jdk
export PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$HOME/.cargo/bin:$HOME/.npm-global/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin
```

I quickly wrote my first program using my newly added code:

```java
public class Reverse {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("OpenJDK Rocks".reverse());
  }
}
```

Compiled it and ran it:

```bash
ovidiu@ionescu:~/3party/OpenJDK/Tests/001$ javac Reverse.java 
ovidiu@ionescu:~/3party/OpenJDK/Tests/001$ java Reverse
skcoR KDJnepO
```

Well, that went much easier than expected. I would advise you to give it a try, it's quite a lot of fun.

Now I need to somehow persuade an OpenJDK contributor to raise an issue about not having reverse in String itself 
but only in StringBuilder and sumbmit my patch.
